#1065: Write iterators concept (#1486)
exercism/rust: concepts/iterators/introduction.md

# Introduction

In Rust, an iterator is any value that implements the [`Iterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html).
The values of an iterator can be manually advanced by calling the `next` method on the iterator.

```rust
trait Iterator {
    type Item;
    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item>;
    // many built-in methods implemented
}
```

Moreover, if there is a way to iterate over a certain type,
such as `Vec` or `HashMap` of Rust's [`collections`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/index.html),
then this type can implement [`IntoIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.IntoIterator.html).

```rust
trait IntoIterator where Self::IntoIter: Iterator<Item=Self::Item> {
    type Item;
    type IntoIter: Iterator;
    fn into_iter(self) -> Self::IntoIter;
}
```

> 

Author: Brilliant 👍

An understanding of `traits` is not necessary for this concept and we will have a whole exercise for you to master `traits`.
For now, just remember that:

- Any type that implements `IntoIterator` is called an _iterable_ because it can be turned into an iterator.
- And any type that implements `Iterator` is an iterator, which _produces_ values and can be _iterated over_.
- You can get an iterator from any type that implements `IntoIterator` by calling its `into_iter` method.

## `into_iter` and for loops

As you can see, any type that implements `IntoIterator` has an `into_iter` method.
In fact, you're probably familiar with for loops over a vector (`Vec<T>`):

```rust
// capitals is a `Vec`, which implements `IntoIterator`
let lor = vec!["Ainur", "Elves", "Men", "Dwarves", "Hobbits", "Orcs", "Dragons"];
for people in &lor {

>     println!("{}", people);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    println!("{people}");
```

}
```

> which are just a shorthand for calling the vector's `into_iter` method to turn the `iterable` into an `iterator`
> and then calls the `next` method on the `iterator` until it produces no more values (i.e. returns `None`):
> 
> ```rust
> // capitals is a `Vec`, which implements `IntoIterator`
> let mut peoples = (&lor).into_iter();
> 
> // capitals_iterator implements `Iterator`, which has the default `next` method
> while let Some(people) = peoples.next() {
>     println!("{}", people);
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fundamentally, a `for` loop is just shorthand for calling its argument's `into_iter` method, and then calling `next()` until it stops producing items. In other words, the previous loop desugars as:

```rust
{
    let mut iterator = (&lor).into_iter();
    while let Some(people) = iterator.next() {
        println!("{people}");
    }
}
```
```

## `iter` and `iter_mut` methods

> Most Rust collection types (such as `Vec`, `HashMap`, `HashSet`) provide `iter` and `iter_mut` methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most Rust collection types provide `iter` and `iter_mut` methods.
```

Students should know what collections are by this point in the document.

> For an iterator that produces values of type `T`, these two methods perform the following by convention:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a collection of type `T`, these two methods perform the following by convention:
```

- The iterator returned by `iter` will yield immutably borrowed `&T`.
- The iterator returned by `iter_mut` will yield mutably borrowed `&mut T`.

```rust
let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3];

// Using `iter` method
let mut iterator = v.iter();
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), Some(&1));
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), Some(&2));
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), Some(&3));
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), None);

// Using `iter_mut` method
let mut muterator = v.iter_mut();
assert_eq!(muterator.next(), Some(&mut 1));
assert_eq!(muterator.next(), Some(&mut 2));
assert_eq!(muterator.next(), Some(&mut 3));
assert_eq!(muterator.next(), None);
```

## Difference between `iter`, `iter_mut`, and `into_iter`

> Now that we've covered `iter`, `iter_mut`, and `into_iter`, what are the differences?
> Let's amend our previous bullet points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `iter`, `iter_mut`, and `into_iter` all produce iterators, what are the differences?
```

"previous bullet points" is ambiguous, there are several bulleted sections prior.

> - The iterator returned by `iter` will yield immutably borrowed `&T`.
> - The iterator returned by `iter_mut` will yield mutably borrowed `&mut T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The iterator returned by `iter` will conventionally yield immutably borrowed `&T`.
- The iterator returned by `iter_mut` will conventionally yield mutably borrowed `&mut T`.
```

Unfortunately, this is not the case for _all_ collections; we can't enforce that kind of relation without a new trait, which as I recall can't exist until either HKTs or GATs.

Author: What are GATs?

Reviewer: Generic Associated Types; see https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/08/03/GATs-stabilization-push.html.

- The iterator returned by `into_iter` may yield `T`, `&T` or `&mut T`, depending on its context.

> Wait a second, what do we mean by _depending on its context_?
> Just what `into_iter` is invoked on.
> Let's clarify using the following bullet points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is the context for an `into_iter` invocation?
Its `self` type.
Recall that there are `IntoIterator` implementations for `Vec`, `&'a Vec`, and `&'a mut Vec`.
Therefore: 
```

Aiming for somewhat more of a reference style; somewhat less of a conversational style.

Author: Sure! I was trying conversational because Jeremy mentioned it in last Friday's sync, but for the track it's better to stick to one style.

- `(&v).into_iter()` is equal to `v.iter()` => returns `&T`
- `(&mut v).into_iter()` is equal to `v.iter_mut()` => returns `&mut T`
- `v.into_iter()` => returns `T` and moves the values

This is most clear in for loops:

> - `for num in &v {...}` => returns `&T`
> - `for num in &mut v {...}` => returns `&mut T`
> - `for num in v {...}` => returns `T` and moves the values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `for num in &v {...}` => binds `&T`
- `for num in &mut v {...}` => binds `&mut T`
- `for num in v {...}` => binds `T` and moves the values
```

We're binding the variable name `num` in each of these cases, not returning anything.

> Unless we are working with for loops, it's always clearer to write `v.iter()` instead of `(&v).into_iter()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is often clearer to write `v.iter()` instead of `(&v).into_iter()`.
```

Therefore, there are ergonomic reasons for preferring `iter` and `iter_mut` over `into_iter`.

## Using built-in methods for iterators

Iterators provide numerous built-in methods, such as `map`, `filter`, `collect`.
These methods are sometimes used with closures.

> Using `map` with a closure to transform a vector into a different one:
> 
> ```rust
> let v = [1, 2, 3];
> let v2 iter = v.iter().map(|x| 2 * x);
> println!("{:?}", v2);
> // => [2, 4, 6]
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`map` uses a closure to transform the values of an iterator.
`take` truncates a (potentially infinite) iterator into one which terminates after at most the specified number of items.

```rust
for even_number in (0..).into_iter().map(|x| x * 2).take(4) {
    let odd_number = even_number + 1;
    println!("{even_number} => {odd_number}");
}
```
```

Using `filter` with a closure to filter for certain attributes and then use `collect` to return a collection again:

```rust
let lor = vec!["Ainur", "Elves", "Men", "Dwarves", "Hobbits", "Orcs", "Dragons"];
let short_people = ["Dwarves", "Hobbits"];

let short_filter: Vec<&str> = lor
    .into_iter()
    .filter(|people| short_people.contains(people))
    .collect();

println!("{:?}", short_filter);
// => ["Dwarves", "Hobbits"]

> ```

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion
`filter` transforms the iterator into one which only returns those values for which the closure evaluates to `true`.
`count` consumes the iterator, returning the number of items produced.

```rust
let lor = vec!["Ainur", "Elves", "Men", "Dwarves", "Hobbits", "Orcs", "Dragons"];
let short_people = ["Dwarves", "Hobbits"];
let num_tall_people = lor.iter().filter(|people| !short_people.contains(people)).count();
assert_eq!(num_tall_people, 5);
```

`flat_map` transforms an iterator by transforming each item into a new iterator via the provided closure, then flattening all the produced new iterators by chaining them together.
`collect` produces a new collection, as long as the collection type implements [`FromIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.FromIterator.html).

```rust
let words = ["alpha", "beta", "gamma"];

// chars() returns an iterator
let merged: String = words.iter()
                          .flat_map(|s| s.chars())
                          .collect();
assert_eq!(merged, "alphabetagamma");
```

The [`Iterator` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html) provides _many_ such useful iterator transforms; it's worth reading the documentation and familiarizing yourself with them.
~~~

It's worth talking about a few other examples of iterator methods IMO, to pique interest.

## Laziness

It is important to know that Rust iterators are lazy:

> they have no effect until we call certain methods that can consume the iterator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they produce no values until we consume the iterator.
```

Even an unconsumed iterator can have an effect. For example, if its closure borrows some value, that value can't be mutably borrowed elsewhere unless the compiler can prove the unconsumed iterator is never used after that point.

If you write and run the following code:

```rust
(0..5).map(|x| x * x);
```

You will get the following compiler error:

```rust
 --> src/main.rs:2:5
  |
2 |     (0..5).map(|x| x * x);
  |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  |
  = note: `#[warn(unused_must_use)]` on by default
  = note: iterators are lazy and do nothing unless consumed
```

This is because `map` is an adapter method that returns another iterator.

> To make the iterator not lazy, we must utilize consumer methods, which take an iterator and return something other than an iterator,
> thus consuming the iterator in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To consume an iterator, either use a `for` loop or use an iterator method which produces some value which is not itself an iterator.
```

- Any type that implements `IntoIterator` is called an _iterable_ because it can be turned into an iterator.
- Any type that implements `Iterator` is an iterator, which _produces_ values and can be _iterated over_.
- You can get an iterator from any type that implements `IntoIterator` by calling its `into_iter` method.
- Every iterator [implements `IntoIterator`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.IntoIterator.html#impl-IntoIterator-25) and produces itself.
- `for` loops always operate on iterators and call `IntoIterator` implicitly on their range argument.

## `into_iter` and for loops

You're probably familiar with for loops over a vector:

```rust
// lor is a `Vec`, which implements `IntoIterator`
let lor = vec!["Ainur", "Elves", "Men", "Dwarves", "Hobbits", "Orcs", "Dragons"];
for people in &lor {
    println!("{people}");
}
```

Fundamentally, a `for` loop is just shorthand for calling its argument's `into_iter` method,
and then calling `next()` until it stops producing items. In other words, the previous loop desugars as:

```rust
{
    let mut iterator = (&lor).into_iter();
    while let Some(people) = iterator.next() {
        println!("{people}");
    }

> }

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion
}
```
~~~

Missing close quote.

## `iter` and `iter_mut` methods

Most Rust collection types provide `iter` and `iter_mut` methods.
For a collection of type `T`, these two methods perform the following by convention:

- The iterator returned by `iter` will yield immutably borrowed `&T`.
- The iterator returned by `iter_mut` will yield mutably borrowed `&mut T`.

```rust
let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3];

// Using `iter` method
let mut iterator = v.iter();
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), Some(&1));
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), Some(&2));
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), Some(&3));
assert_eq!(iterator.next(), None);

// Using `iter_mut` method

> let mut muterator = v.iter_mut();

Reviewer: It might be worth demoing why you'd ever use `iter_mut`; something like

```rust
for value in v.iter_mut() {
     *value *= *value;
}
println!("{v}");
// [1, 4, 9]
```

> # About

Reviewer: Header swap
